# Value = Benefits MINUS Costs

My [PhD Literature Review](https://repository.lboro.ac.uk/articles/thesis/Does_the_way_museum_staff_define_inspiration_help_them_work_with_information_from_visitors_Social_Media_/9496598?file=17123216) suggested that epiphanies are a myth, but I came pretty close to having one of my own in 2018. I was working in Cambridge University Library at the time, and the research team I was part of had been tasked with writing a business case for two separate IT procurements. Pretty much everything we were doing was wrong - it was all very heavy on solution without having delved too much into the problems we were supposed to be solving; in fact everyone had decided what the solution was before we'd been hired, even.

However, as part of the rigmarole of getting a system in place, we had to write a business case, to a strict template which also required a business model. As I'm really not scared of looking stupid, I put my hand up in front of the chief IT Programme Manager and out-and-out asked him to explain what one of those was (I think the sentence I used started with "I know I've been in the computer programming business for 20 years already, but...")

He gave me a kind of chuckle that indicated I might not have been the first geek to have asked him this question, then showing tremendous patience, he sat me on his knee and walked me through it. This was when all sorts of things that had been brewing in my addled brain for the previous ten years or more (not least the damn PhD itself) finally clicked into place. Incidentally - this is what an "epiphany" is - there's not much mystical about it, it's just the last couple of neurons between different parts of your brain making a key connection - but when it's one of those ones where the connection is *really* key, you can kind of feel it, physically.

What Chris showed me that afternoon was that is was possible to estimate the relative values of bits of an Information System in order to prioritise which one to build first. This is, of course, *the* most fundamental part of being small-a-agile, but I've not found a single book that tells you this (maybe "the Lean Enterprise"?). Instead I had to wait for 12 years after writing my first Unit Test for Chris to tell me. And try though I might throughout the following decade or so, I haven't found many other people that have been through the same "epiphany", either: it's like some sort of Magic Circle thing.

On the flip-side, the version of business modelling Chris taught me was really, *really* slow, and still based on special assumptions made by "experts" up-front. Chris did at least explain a technique where you had to note those assumptions explicitly, make the figures easy to change, and even Monte Carlo it all if necessary, but it was all very heavyweight and up-front. In his defence, Chris told me that he loved small-a-agility but that the IT function at Cambridge had made so many bad fists of implementing capital-A-Agile in the past that it was practically a swear-word in his department, so he had to do it by stealth, and given that the institution is over 800 years old, taking six months to produce a huge up-front business case is kind of being agile, anyway. But he *definitely* got the value bit - in particular the bit where you map benefits onto features of the system you're proposing so you can work out which ones are worth doing, and what order to do them in.

However, the insistence that we spend *so* long toiling away at it without, you know, *testing* any of the numerous assumptions we were working with rankled really badly with me, so I set out to find a more small-a-agile approach. Enter [the Business Model Canvas](https://www.strategyzer.com/library/the-business-model-canvas).

## How the Business Model Canvas can provide focus and direction

If you've waded through [article 2](./Agile_AntiPatterns.md) then you might have found some links to [Sebastian Gebski's critique of Domain Driven Design](https://no-kill-switch.ghost.io/the-failed-promise-of-domain-driven-design-part-1/), where he provided these two typical examples of the sort of design trade-off that DDD provides very little help with solving:

* Should "discounts" be a part of "item pricing"? Depend on it? Or the other way around? And the "basket discounts"? And the "volume discounts"? And ...
* What would be the best way to organise courier delivery? Around "courier availability", "routes", "scheduled deliveries", or "availability in the vicinity" (these are four different perspectives on the very same data)?

I added my weight to this by suggesting that it's *extremely unlikely* that any business person alive would be able to provide a sensible answer to either of these questions outright, but that this is precisely the sort of logical twister-game that software engineers often put them in. I also promised that I'd re-use these examples to explain how the Business Model Canvas might provide a useful point of reference to help answer them. So here goes.

The answers to both questions depend on the right-hand side of the canvas, in particular "Customer Relationships", "Customer Segments" and "Channels", and also the "Revenue Model" at the bottom. In the case of "how do we model discounts?", the bulk of the answer is covered by "Customer Segments" and "Customer Relationships". If you're working in a niche, business-to-consumer segment and only intend to have intermittent relationships with your customers, but your revenue model involves trying to get rid of stock quickly (as a lot of them do), then you'd tend towards modelling discounts at the item level. If you're stocking items with the intention of cross-selling them, and you also want to build long-running customer relationships by making them feel more valued, and that they're being canny and getting a bargain, perhaps you'd go for discounts at the basket level. Whereas if you're selling wholesale to tradespeople in more of a B2C model, you'd go for volume discounts.

And as to which way around to model the dependency - that would depend on just how big a part of your relationship with the customer discounting is going to be: if you're after an exclusive-feeling relationship with a "high-end" segment, you ain't going to be discounting much, so you'd make the item the dominant class and have discounts depend on those, whereas if you're intending to pile any-old-stuff up high and sell it cheap, then it becomes all about the discount and the items themselves are secondary.

The second question brings "Channels" more into the picture, as its specifically concerned with how your product is going to make its way into customers' hands. But it also has its foot in the Revenue Model, too: if you're selling lots of small widgets to thousands of customers and they're all putting in multiple orders a week, courier availability sounds like a better option, whereas if you're delivering pre-fab home-working sheds that need craning over peoples' houses, the route takes on a lot more importance.

The way the Business Model Canvas works, here, is that it gives both the business people *and* the engineers a point of reference to answer these sort of abstract questions; one that's based on *working with the customer* and *delivering value*, rather than just insisting that abstract logical questions get answered on the spot devoid of any context. The engineers need answers to questions like these (honestly, they really do), but often lack a framework to help business / product people answer them. The Business Model Canvas provides that sort of framework.

There's more below about how aligning with value delivery provides a much better footing for isolating team work than DDD ever could.

## Uncontrolled costs

I mentioned that costs in the Digital Realm are seriously out of control in [article two](Agile_AntiPatterns.md). I think the whole topic is seriously undercooked in the product world, too. I've done the foundation piece of [Pragmatic](https://www.pragmaticinstitute.com/product/) training, for example, and while it's really good and gets a lot of key things absolutely right, their [Framework](https://www.pragmaticinstitute.com/product/framework/) has *thirty-seven* boxes on it (gulp!) and "costs" is nowhere to be seen (I expect it falls in the "business" column somewhere but just should be more obvious). Similarly, Marty Cagan buries the concept of costs in his discussion of "Business Alignment" / "Viability" - so it *is* in there, but not as explicitly as it should be.

Hence: *do a Business Model Canvas* - the whole left-hand-side is "costs", really - and getting it all understood and under your nose *from the very start* is why you need engineers / technicians to be at the table. Good technicians will have something useful to say about the whole model, but the costs side is where they really contribute.  

To reiterate: value is *actually* **Benefits minus Costs**, and Digital Realm work *really* struggles with this. We don't have to look any further than [this utter car-crash](https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/ai-stocks-risk-nvidia-gpus-blackwell-tech-outlook-depreciation-accounting-2024-8) for evidence. (TLDR - if you buy $ Billions worth of GPUs in one go, when new / 'better' ones are being released all the time, then the value of your CapEx tanks a lot quicker than you're probably accounting for...)
