# Aligning Effort With Value Delivery

The trick is to set objectives that relate to measures of business performance, e.g.:

| The old way (outputs)             | The new way (outcomes)    |
| ----------------------------------| ------------------------- |
| Build a better checkout process   | Reduce drop-outs from the checkout from 43% to 25% |
| Create an installer               | Decrease lead-in time from decision to buy to getting up and running from 32 days to 5 |
| Personalise the recommendation system | Increase occurrences of cross-selling at the checkout from 12% of orders to 45% |  

The whole idea is to give creative people problems to solve, *without proscribing the solutions*. Troubles occur because *Product people are also creative*, so we have a tendency to try and shrink-wrap solutions and hand them over. Computer programmers can then also enable this unhelpful tendency by asking the question: "... what are the requirements?". This is often shorthand for: "...tell me what to do, then I'll passive-aggressively tell you why that's a stupid idea, before suggesting my *own* stupid idea that's also not based on any understanding of the problem, either".

Anyway, the theory of setting problems that have solutions with measurable outcomes has a name, which is...

## Objectives and Key Results (OKRs)

Intel came up with OKRs in the 80s and 90s - their CEO Andy Grove based it on Peter Drucker's business philosophy. OKRs are all the rage now, though would you be surprised if I told you [a lot of people do it badly](https://medium.com/@kmackie4/why-most-okrs-fail-and-the-fix-that-actually-works-47c500c91a6f)?

The *intention* behind OKRs is to empower your staff by leaving the "how" of delivering objectives up to them. In the frictionless Digital Realm, there's one major advantage to this: if you proscribe a solution to the team and tell them you're going to pat them on the back if they deliver that solution, they'll go ahead and deliver it even when it's clear it won't work.

In case you missed it, "agility" means "the ability to change direction quickly". So reserving the pats and tickles for when an *outcome* is delivered encourages the team to switch tactics once it's clear the original ones aren't moving the needle. Working in the Digital Realm means there's nothing to stop you doing so, other than fear, and / or your clumsy ways of working.

That's the *theory*, anyway, but empowering teams this much is a *big cultural shift*. Managers really are in the habit of telling people what to do; even the good ones do so from time to time, *because they can*. So it takes quite a lot of willpower to let go like that. The main place I've worked that tried it didn't really get it: "we're doing OKRs now" was announced with a bit of a fanfare, but before we knew it we'd fallen back into old habits of slogging through set plans and implementing business cases that defined solutions for us to deliver.

In other words, we weren't using the fact we were working in the Digital Realm to our advantage. No fault of the theory - it wasn't really given a fair shake, because management didn't get why the Digital Realm is different.

## No (Heavy) Roadmaps

The main force that holds management back from going all in on OKRs is fear of uncertainty. The artefact that most embodies that fear is *The Product Roadmap*. Our Marty Cagan *hates roadmaps*, because they're always wrong. Like all the other pickled-in-aspic, heavyweight, up-front artefacts (business cases, project plans etc), they provide a misguided sense of certainty, while going out-of-date before the ink is dry. The fundamental issue with roadmaps is: "... you can *never* know all there is to know when you write one".

This is, of course, obvious to all and sundry, so barely a roadmap has been committed to without the caveat: "...it probably won't turn out like this, but..." However, all the caveats in the world never seem to register with the Sales and Marketing teams, who go ahead and promise the customers that this gizmo will definitely cure all known diseases by that date. And in the meantime, Finance are happy because uncertainty mucks up all their sums, so they will cling to a veneer of certainty like a sailor to a piece of slippery wreckage.

Enter a couple of more small-a-agile alternatives (that at first glance seem *very similar to each other*) - [Lean Value Trees and Measures of Success](https://www.slideshare.net/slideshow/lean-value-tree-overview-82783795/82783795) - as described in Highsmith, Luu and Robinson's book [Edge](https://www.thoughtworks.com/en-gb/insights/books/edge) - and [Itamar Gilad's GIST Framework](https://itamargilad.com/gist-framework/). Both of these ideas offer methodical ways of *embracing* uncertainty, by at the very least acknowledging that we don't know what we don't know, factoring *the extent of uncertainty* into our decision-making, and centring all planning around efforts to lessen uncertainty (i.e. "to learn more about the problem") as we move towards our goals. The nitty-gritty of managing the uncertainty will be discussed in more depth below; in this section we'll deal with how both frameworks deal with planning and management.

These ideas are, at least on the surface, pretty similar as they both rely on "trees" - i.e. ways of arranging strategy, tactics and tasks hierarchically to plan and manage discovery and delivery concurrently, in small-a-agile ways. GIST maps out the route from strategy, via tactics, to solutions in a four-level deep hierarchy tree of Goals, Ideas, Steps and Tasks. It is explicitly related to Objectives and Key Results (OKRs), so the Goals are structured around the Key Result needles you have to move in an explicit time frame, e.g.: "in Q3 of this year we've got to reduce the average checkout time on our e-commerce site from eight minutes to four minutes". All organisations should manage a hierarchy of these, that align to particular "top-level" metrics (i.e. the overall ones for the company). Itamar suggests having two of these:

1. A "North Star Metric", which is the most-simply expressed (but accurate) measure of the overall value you're delivering to the market (he suggests "items consumed" as an example for a grocery supermarket, for example).
2. A "Top Business Metric", which is intended to keep all the work everyone does viable and aligned with the business. This is usually something like "increase revenue from £1M to £1.1M" or "increase earnings from 22% to 23%".

Highsmith et al take a very similar view, but are not aligned to OKRs as explicitly. Their idea of a North Star Metric is described in terms of an organisations "fitness function", i.e. how capable it is of delivering core value to customers, and suggest that this provides more scope for including intangible factors such as "inspirational quality of leadership" into the mix. So while they also suggest a four-level hierarchy from strategy, via tactics, to actual work, their "root" concept is "vision", rather than goals. "Vision", for them, is a "guiding direction towards which all investments should contribute", and goals come in at the next, main branch level. More fundamentally, while Itamar bundles the framework for organising strategy, tactics and work, and the processes of measuring success and progress, into one, Highsmith and co keep them separate:

* *Lean Value Trees* are for arranging the strategy and tactics so that small pieces of work can be undertaken independently of each other, but they all align to the Vision.
* *Measures of Success* provide the feedback that needles are being moved, and more value is indeed being delivered, as each pieces of work is undertaken.

Both frameworks insist that you should *never do too much work without checking its impact*, thus aligning fundamentally with small-a-agility. Indeed, while both seem to suggest that "you should do this in cahoots with small-a-agile Software Engineering", I'd go all-in and say that this **is** small-a-agile Software Production. These sorts of approaches: working out what value you're intending to add, how you're going to measure the next bit, taking a step towards that, then checking the impact - this *is* agility. 

Finally, we've got some proper control around the concept of "value" in the first manifesto principle. It only took 20 years.

Both of these approaches make a lot more sense than just bunging stuff in a roadmap that everyone knows at heart is wrong. Of the two, I think I prefer Itamar's one, because it's explicitly aligned with OKRs and is just a bit clearer. He has a couple of good suggestions about quantifying uncertainty (the Confidence Meter), and planning around it (Impact, Confidence and Ease, or ICE) - both of which I'll dip into later. The upshot of Itamar's approach is an *Outcome Roadmap*, a neat idea that re-works the roadmap approach from: "...we'll deliver *this feature* on this date" - to: "...by this point we'll either have moved the needle on this metric to this point, or decided that there's a whole better way of defining it, and done that instead".

Itamar's not against putting *actual feature delivery milestones* on the map, either - but **only** when confidence that the feature in question is going to produce the required outcome is *extremely high*. All the rest of the work that a Product Team conducts is in service to either increasing the confidence level of each idea until its delivered, or establishing that the idea ain't that great, and canning it quickly before you waste any more time on it. Like Marty, Itamar is behind the Engineer, Designer and Product Manager trio idea, too. Oh and another neat idea is that the point of delivery isn't actually "maximum confidence", either - that comes after you've been running the product in the wild for a while. Though IMHO it **never** comes, because frictionless Digital Realm etc etc. As soon as you think you know it all, something or someone will drive a coach and horses through your comfortable certainties.

Highsmith et al are stronger when describing  *what all the levels of middle management are for*, still, once teams are generating all the ideas. They go into a lot more detail about how to *govern* these team-centric approaches, and how the "upper-echelons"\* should manage the "visionary" bits at the root of the Lean Value Tree. I don't recall either book suggesting how to *account* for them, though. In theory it ought not to be any harder than setting up a big project budget after a lot of inaccurate up-front planning, but both approaches are going to have to get over the hurdle of telling finance "...we don't know *exactly*" when they ask "... what are that team going to be doing for the next 9 months?". OKRs tell us that the answer should be "reducing (or increasing) that number from X to Y", of course, but there won't be any "how" in the answer. Itamar's suggestion for dealing with this situation is to point at all past failed predictions of "they're *definitely* going to deliver this thing, which will *definitely* solve this poorly-understood problem", and asking "shouldn't we try something different, maybe?". This seems logical, at least.

\* In spite of hierarchies being flat, of course.
