# Customer Discovery

I mentioned Pragmatic above, and as I say, they nail the fundamentals when it comes to product - it's *problem, problem, problem* all the way with them - and more power to their elbow. They also have a great mnemonic: NIHITO - *Nothing Important Happens In The Office*, mirroring Steve Blank's chief slogan: *GET OUT OF THE BUILDING*.

However - to paraphrase [article two](Agile_AntiPatterns.md) - the biggest, stupidest anti-pattern in the whole of Product is people sitting around pretending they know what their customers / user base are like, or what they do, without ever spending any time at all anywhere near them. This still seems to go on all over the place and it's the absolute dark-heart of everything that's still wrong with the whole IT business. Just **STOP IT**!

The second-most stupid anti-pattern is *asking people the wrong question* if / when you do go to see them. And that wrong question is: *"...what do you want?"*

This question is a lot worse than useless, because 99 times out of 100 the person you're asking is crazy / misguided enough to think they know the answer. Indeed one of the main reasons people don't actually go out and see customers / users in the wild is because one of them has come into the office with "what they want" on the tip of their tongue. They're desperate to waste your time and money.

Of course, even though it would often be a lot cheaper, we shouldn't hide when they do - time in the presence of customers is the most valuable and important thing (see Marty Cagan again - at least an hour every week with a different one, and *take an engineer with you when you go*). But if we want to get to the *actual problem* and avoid all the waste, we have to *reframe the question* from "...what do you want?" to: *"...what were you doing?"*

People just can't answer "what do you want?" truthfully. If they genuinely knew what the solution to their problems were, they wouldn't need you, would they? They could solve it themselves. The issue is that they don't even know in enough detail what their *problems* are... But *everyone* can tell you *exactly* what they were going through when they suffered the problem, in extreme detail. Just ask the question people can answer easily, and truthfully.

This clever re-framing idea has emerged in a few places. From the more technical end of things, it's at the core of [Event Storming](https://www.eventstorming.com/), for example, where you work through scenario timelines with the people that have the problem you believe you can solve. Strategyzer are all over it, too - it was always right in the middle of the Business Model Canvas, but took up so much room that they invented the [Value Proposition Canvas](https://www.strategyzer.com/library/value-proposition-design-2) to cope.

The absolute best guide to asking the question properly, though, is Bob Moesta's [Demand Side Sales 101](https://www.demandsidesales.com/). The reason it wins is that is aligns the question with, er, *Sales*. And, well, perhaps I've just been unlucky, but wherever I've worked Sales have always been the biggest ~~pain in the arse~~ disruptive influence to the smooth running of things. Because they've *always* sold stuff that **wasn't actually the product**. Which from an engineering pov means *having to tweak the product to fit the sale* every time. Which, because it's the Digital Realm, is *always possible* but *never a good idea*. Such tweaks are [how all the Technical Debt gets into products](https://youtu.be/d2Ddo8OV7ig?si=aQmErwkglXuD-Qyx), meaning *each time it happens, it makes the next tweak harder to deliver*. Before you know it, everything's seized shut, and all Sales can do from then on is make your company look dumb.

This is *not Sales' fault*, of course - it's a capitalist world (still, just about), and if they didn't sell you wouldn't get paid. The issue is that it's often not clear enough *why* the customer should buy the product, so Sales have to "elaborate" to a greater or lesser extent (always greater). Bob Moesta twigged this, then (as he's a proper engineer), he put his boots on the ground to find out the cause of the problem. He got himself a sales job, selling kitchen work-surfaces in a local hardware shop. And from day one got completely into the trap I've described above, and nearly brought the company that hired him to its knees, by promising customers undeliverable things in order to make sales.

Bob's book describes what he did to fix the problem, and it's the one I'd recommend the most of all those I've mentioned in my mega-rants. It's pretty simple, and the core simplicity hangs on asking the easy-to-answer question. Which, in common with the Value Proposition Canvas, comes from...

## Jobs To Be Done

I'm not too well-read on [Clayton Christensen's underlying philosophy](https://hbr.org/2016/09/know-your-customers-jobs-to-be-done) other than what Bob Moesta says about it (he was a big part of coming up with the underlying idea), but I believe there's a suggestion that it helps to think in terms of customers just "hiring" your product to do a job, and they'll keep hiring it until they find one that does the job better. There's an overlap with Product / Market fit here - your product doesn't necessarily have to have *perfect* fit, as long as it's better than the competition - but obviously the closer the fit, the harder it'll be for the competition to better it. The key thing is that we define the market, and the fit that the product has with it, in terms of the *jobs people are trying to do*, or in Bob's terms: *the struggles they are having*, and not *the people themselves*, which is the more traditional approach to marketing, and enshrined in things like Personas etc.

Incidentally, it's this tweak to "struggle" rather than "job" that aligns Bob Moesta's ideas up better with Sales / Go-To-Market, because what he calls "the struggling moment" is the point a customer is most susceptible to the idea of switching to a better way of getting their job done. Thus the key to good product marketing is to find these moments and ensure your market are aware of your product when they occur, and also provide a satisfying solution to the struggle, of course.

## The Value Proposition Canvas

This is another Strategyzer artefact, that is literally central to the Business Model Canvas, and ties the whole business model to the value you're delivering. They realised they needed it when the "Value Proposition" boxes in the middle of everyone's canvases started overflowing in tsunamis of sticky notes.

This idea is also based on the Jobs To Be Done approach, though it doesn't dwell on the "you're just renting the product" idea. Instead it formalises the process of defining the job that customers and users are trying to do, looking at the pain points around getting the job done, and how your shiny new technology can relieve them. But the Value Proposition Canvas also encourages you to focus upon the extra (often unexpected) gains that could be achieved by implementing the new technology in the form of "gains" and "gain-creators" - the aspects of the technology that (in Don Norman's terms) "afford" new opportunities that didn't exist before.

This is the whole "disruption" thing (also a Clay Christensen idea) writ large, and is *very* aligned with the Digital Realm and the whole Silicon Valley philosophy of "breaking things" which underpins lovely organisations such as Uber, Deliveroo / DoorDash, AirBnB etc. So at this point, I really, *really* get it, but start to get a bit sniffy about it all, too. There's just something *antisocial* about the idea of "disrupting" things that sticks in my throat a bit (see below), particularly when the things you are breaking are civil societies, or "the environment", or cities full of dehumanised people...

Who do you think you are, Sham 69? (Yes, probably).

But, as with everything I've put in these three articles, the Digital Realm helps you "disrupt" things (should you wish), because of the whole "infinite possibilities" and "lack of friction" schtick. Problems occur when the numbers on the screen that are supposed to represent how people live and behave actually replace the people themselves. At this point, your OKR about reducing the average delivery time becomes a herd of people on e-bikes weaving in and out of pedestrians at (literal) breakneck speeds. I guess what I'm saying is that there's no substitute for *actual field work* - digging into what's going on behind the numbers. In other words - NIHITO / Get Out Of The Building! But this bit would be better off coming at the conclusion?